---
title: "XXY Model: The Six Vertex model solution"
date: 2021-01-14T12:23:06-03:00
draft: false 
---

This is the begining of a sequence of studies about the XXY model. Of course, one should note that we will not be ttalking about the XXY model in this first post and that the title seems somewhat missleading. However, there is a deep connection between those models and the analitical results for the Six Vertex model will gain a great importance once the connection is elucidated. With that in mind, we can concentract ourselves on the analitical features of this model and take a step at the time.

## The ice rule

The six vertex model is a classical model initially created for describing the properties of ice lattices. The atoms of oxygen are arranged in a tetrahedral way, so that it interacts effectivally with 4 hydrogens. Each oxygen is separated by a distance which is about 3 times the bond distance for the O-H bond in a gas. Its easy to imagine that the hydrogen will likely choose one of the oxygens to stay closer. We can assign to each O-O line an vector which is parallel to the dipole moment generated by the casual "hydrogen afinnity". 


<div id='ice-to-six-vertexes'></div>
[image here: H2O lattice becoming a six vertex]

We shall now reffer to the oxygen as a vertex as it can be viewed as the encounter of 4 "dipolar lines". Because we know that ice is electrically neutral, we can impose that each vertex should not hold a great effective charge. This is, at each vertex there should be no charge divergence, if a line enters a vertexs, it should also leave the vertex. That leads us to the main feature of our model, the **ice rule**. The number of lines that enters a vertex should be equal to the ones that exit. Initially our model could describe $2^4 = 16$ configurations for each vertex, now only 6 of those satisfies the _ice rule_.   

[image here: configurations excluded and included by the ice rules]

